Live Terpsicode Coding As A Dance Tool

Coding as an art form is different from other mediums in that there isn’t necessarily an end product. Instead, the ever changing and rewritten code that’s being displayed to an audience is the art. In the context of dance, code is written live for dancers to interpret in real time. The output of the code to be interpreted varies vastly, dancers could receive coded music to improvise to, spoken dance moves to execute, or even visuals to recreate with their bodies. Dance is considered to be harmonious with live coding because there is no real or universal way to transcribe and replicate it. This means that the only way to experience a dance is to go and see a performance, which is similar to how live coding exists as an art.

One choreographer, Anna Halprin, describes 10 levels of openness to her dancers before performances, with 1 being the most open ended and 10 being the least. Level one performances may involve coded music and abstract visuals, and level 10 being real dance terminology to perform. In some cases, dancers can wear electronics in their costumes, which may be triggered by computer code. For example, code could be written to vibrate or light up a device on the dancers’ arm, prompting them to move it.

Terpsicode is a small developing software used for live dance performances using still images of real dance poses as a way to form patterns and manipulate movement in the choreographic process. It uses PEG.js and javascript for its language, and was created with collected vocabulary describing the movement, timing, and phrasing which was then sorted into categories. These vocabulary words were then tagged to their respective images that they represented. In the first few versions of Terpsicode, coders and dancers were limited to basic dance moves and rhythms. Each coded image would be displayed on the screen for 3 seconds for the dancer to replicate, and then move to the next. But with further improvements to the software, coders can now add programs beyond displaying images. For example, “retrograde” will play the coded images in reverse, and “accumulation” will start with the first image, then first and second, then first, second, third, etc. These improvements have made the live coding process much faster and smoother for all people involved.

Bibliography
Millard, Olivia. “What’s The Score? Using Scores in Dance Improvisation.” Ausdance., 1 Mar. 2016, ausdance.org.au/articles/details/whats-the-score-using-scores-in-dance-improvisation.
Sicchio, Kate. “Live Coding Choreography: Real-Time Programming with Terpsicode: International Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media: Vol 19, No 2.” Taylor & Francis Online, www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/14794713.2022.2099107 . Accessed 23 Mar. 2026.
Sicchio, Kate. “Live Coding Choreography with Terpsicode.” CEC | Canadian Electroacoustic Community, econtact.ca/21_1/sicchio_terpsicode.html . Accessed 22 Mar. 2026. 
